---
title: 'New programme: Opening Extractives launch'
date: 2021-02-15 07:23:00 Z
published: false
categories:
- news
tags:
- OpeningExtractives
---

A new joint programme between Open Ownership (OO) and the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), supported by the BHP Foundation, aims to end the use of anonymous companies linked to corruption and mismanagement in natural resources. 

OO and the EITI today launched **Opening Extractives**, a global programme to advance beneficial ownership transparency. It aims to make a transformational impact in the amount of publicly available information on the owners of extractive companies. 

The oil, gas and mining sectors are at acute risk of corruption due to the often significant revenues stemming from these public assets. Anonymous companies have too often facilitated corruption in the sector, as revealed in a series of scandals from the 2016 Panama Papers to the 2020 Launda Leaks. 

Publishing details of company ownership enables effective taxation and brings data to light that
can be used to identify and address corruption. It can help build fairer markets, encourage
responsible investment and manage business risk.

Research carried out last year by OO and the EITI has shown there is both [high demand for technical assistance to achieve beneficial ownership transparency](https://www.openownership.org/blogs/opening-extractives-research-informs-programme-to-make-beneficial-ownership-transparency-a-reality-in-oil-gas-and-mining/), and a need for tailored support to address the complex dynamics that give rise to reform. 

The programme will be partly funded by the BHP Foundation and delivered by OO and the EITI International Secretariat. 

“Opening Extractives will ultimately improve the quality of life of millions of people in resource-rich countries,” said James Ensor, BHP Foundation Chief Executive Officer and President. “Natural resources are ultimately owned by the citizens of every country in which the resources industry operates. Beneficial ownership transparency is critical to ensuring the revenues generated by the natural resources industry provide maximum benefit to every single citizen. But to be successful it requires governments, industry and civil society to work together – which is why this initiative is so important.”

Thom Townsend, Executive Director of Open Ownership, said: “We are at a tipping point to
move from commitments to the implementation of beneficial ownership transparency, and
Opening Extractives will accelerate progress. Anonymous companies are the getaway vehicle of
choice for stolen public money, and beneficial ownership transparency is the most effective way
to close this down. The Luanda Leaks were a powerful reminder of how some resource-rich
countries have suffered and how public information can thwart corrupt activity.”

Opening Extractives builds on the collaboration of oO and the EITI over the last three years in delivering workshops, training and technical assistance in a broad range of countries. 

“I am confident that this unique partnership is a recipe for delivering a step-change in natural
resource governance,” said Mark Robinson, EITI Executive Director. “The project will seek to
mobilise political and stakeholder commitment and build the technical capability required to
publish and use complex data. It has the potential to scale beyond the extractive sector and beyond the program’s initial group of focus countries.”